#summary Hypertable deployments

This page contains a list of all the existing Hypertable deployments.

  * [http://ansvia.com/ Ansvia] - Product search engine
  * [http://appscale.cs.ucsb.edu AppScale] - an open-source implementation of the Google App Engine cloud computing interface
  * [http://http://www.ayima.com/ Ayima] - Search engine optimization consultancy employing high-quality, sustainable optimization strategies based on thorough data collection and analysis.
  * [http://www.baidu.com/ Baidu] - log analytics 
  * [http://www.endgames.us/ Endgame Systems] - system for monitoring activity on the Internet using active and passive reconnaissance techniques to correlate and produce actionable intelligence and mapping of malicious and compromised systems connected to the Internet.
  *  [http://www.lnl.infn.it/~epics/ EPICS - Laboratori Nazionali di Legnaro] Experimental Physics and Industrial Control System.  Provides an architecture for control system software to be constructed as a scalable, distributed database of control components.  Located in Padova, Italy
  * [http://github.com/AwesomeStanly/HyperTableBrowser Hypertable Browser] Hypertable Browser is the cocoa client application to key-value storage Hypertable
  * [http://site.inepexgps.com/ Inepex] - a customizable, real-time LBS (Location Based Services) system for personal and commercial use (fleet management, mobile phone tracking, ERP connectivity etc.)
  * [http://www.k7cloud.com/cyc_overview.html K7 Cloud Solutions] - Cyclozzo is a state of the art implementation of a Platform as a Service that lets you provide PaaS services on your private cloud.
  * [http://mesosproject.org/ Mesos] - Mesos is a platform for running multiple diverse cluster computing frameworks, such as Hadoop, MPI, and web services, on commodity clusters.  For instructions on how to launch an EBS-backed Hypertable cluster in EC2 with Mesos, see [http://code.google.com/p/hypertable/wiki/Mesos Launching Hypertable with Mesos].
  * [http://www.rediff.com/ Rediff] - Largest India owned and operated web portal.  E-mail SPAM classification, recommendations
  * [http://www.tribalytic.com/ Tribalytic] - Tribalytic is a market research tool that delivers instant insight into your brand and campaign by analysing Twitter data
  * [http://www.dehems.eu/living-labs University of Rousse, Bulgaria] - Master Course in Distributed Databases and DEHEMS project (Digital Environment for Home Energy Management System to implement time series database)
  * [http://www.zvents.com/ Zvents] - Local search engine.  Historical page view graphing application; changelog application; revenue recognition system