#summary Summer of Code 2008 Ideas
#labels GSoC-2008

In case we're accepted as a GSoC project...

= General requirements =
All projects have the following basic requirements:

 * Unless otherwise stated, projects will require programming in C++, as all core libraries and applications of Hypertable are written in C++ for high performance and portability.
 * All materials must be released under the [http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html GNU General Public License (GPL)], version 2.
 * Individual students shall retain copyright on their works.
 * Projects must be tracked and managed in Git, and published on [http://repo.or.cz] or other public git repositories.
 * Weekly project status reports should be sent to the project's mentors.  Each status report should outline what was accomplished that week, any issues that prevented that week's goals from being completed, and your goals for the next week.  This will help you to break your project down into manageable chunks, and will also help the project's mentors to better support your efforts.

Interested students are encouraged to read the
[http://code.google.com/p/google-summer-of-code/wiki/AdviceforStudents Advice for GSoC Students Page],
as it has excellent suggestions that might help you to pick a
project and shape your proposal.

If your proposal is accepted by the Hypertable Development Community
you will be expected to work on it full time during the summer.
It's cool if you want to take a week off for vacation, but remember
that Google is hiring you for the summer to help us improve Hypertable.
That should be your focus.  Don't expect that you will be able to
work on your project for just 10 hours a week and then collect at
the end.

If your original proposal doesn't pan out or becomes too much of
a challenge, you should work with your mentor to help redefine it.
We really want to see every project succeed this summer, as there
is a great deal of interest in these projects from within the
user community.

Students can apply for the program at the
[http://code.google.com/soc/ Google Summer of Code website].
Please consider reviewing our [SoC2008Template] and answering
its questions as part of your application.

= Tentative project and task list =

Here is a [http://code.google.com/p/hypertable/issues/list?q=gsoc-2008 list of issues tagged with GSoC-2008]

Students are encouraged to come up with their own ideas. Feel free to discuss ideas and ask any questions on the [http://groups.google.com/group/hypertable-dev Hypertable development mailing list/discussion group]