#labels GSoC-2008
# Summer of Code Application Template

== Project Goals ==

What is the goal of your project?

Think about what you are going to try to accomplish with your project.

How would you measure its success or failure?

Now put yourself in your potential mentor's shoes.  If you were the mentor for this project, what would make you consider the project to be a success?  What features must be there?  What functionality must it have?

Describe your project in more detail.

A goal is an end result.  A project has a path that leads us to that end result, and should have a few milestones along the way, to help us mark our progress and gain satisfaction from accomplishment.  Write this out, in your own words.  It will help you to better understand what you are proposing to spend 3 months working on.

== Interfaces ==

What parts of Hypertable will you need to call?

There is already a lot of code that makes up the Hypertable project.  It is very unlikely that your project will stand on its own and not make use of any existing code.  Describe the existing parts of Hypertable that your project will be able to call, reuse and benefit from.

What parts of Hypertable might you need to change?

For the same reasons as the last question, there are probably some parts of Hypertable that you would want to modify to implement your project.  This could be an existing shell script, an existing header file, etc. This list does not need to be set in stone; it will most certainly evolve as you learn more about your project and how it will interact with Hypertable.  But it is a good to have a basic idea of what you will need to do. 

== About You ==

Can you list some prior projects that you have worked on?

These don't need to be Hypertable (or even open source) related.  We'd love to know what your background is!  What projects did you work on?  What language(s) and tools were used?  How many people were involved?  What were the primary means of communication within the project?  If you have a CV or resume online, please feel free to include a link.

Do you have any prior Hypertable experience?  Have you started to get involved?

If you have previously submitted a bug report or a patch to our mailing list, please include references (links to Google group) when possible.

_Note, this template is blatantly plagiarized from Git's SoC template._